---
layout: post
title:  "Hello World"
date:   2016-11-15
comments: true
categories: misc
---

I created this site back in August to improve my writing skills, showcase my
technical knowledge and share my opinions. However, writing stuff is not as easy
as it seems. Especially for someone like me who never learnt English properly.
Three months after I published this site, here comes my first blog article. Big
procrastinator confirmed. But anyway, you have to start somewhere, right?

For the remaining part of this article, I want to briefly discuss one of the
major reasons that I started this blog and picked up my reading habit.

Canadian engineering students do not take enough complementary studies
electives. Our society rewards those who are creative and able to bring
revolutionary changes.  Specialized engineers who do not diversify themselves are
always specialized engineers. No one wants to be *just an engineer*.

I talked to a very prominent hacker in the hackathon community at HackPrinceton
a few days ago.  He is the type of person who wins every hackathon that he
participates in. I know that he is pursuing a double major degree but never
expected that neither of his two majors are related to computer science. When
looking at a problem, his knowledge in the two fields he majors in gives him a
different perspective than that of computer science majors. It allows him to
come out with the most creative and effective solutions, the solutions our
society calls for.

Engineering students must broaden their knowledge.  It is ridiculous that
throughout my [8 study
terms](https://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/ENG-Software-Engineering), there
are only three slots for linkage electives and two for science electives.

I am not satisfied to be *just an engineer*. I want to bring real revolutionary
changes to our society and make it a better place.

So I started this blog.
